negative thinking can really impede
one's ability to lead a fulfilling life
when everything is wrong with the world
and nothing is worth pursuing
what's the point in life really even
though a positive mindset is generally
more preferable than a negative one
there's also a dark side to the whole
positivity culture we see nowadays
that's why I think it's time to talk
about the shadow of toxic positivity
[Music]
we all know those people that are always
happy shiny and utterly optimistic about
everything they are equipped with
clear-cut exclusively positive Maxim's
to approach life's problems no matter
how big or small your probably notice
that when you talk to them about the
specific situation you're dealing with
that they sprinkle you with
stereotypical sweet nothing optimism
which is supposed to make your problems
go away in an instant so your spouse
dumped you you'll get over it
you've just been diagnosed with a severe
illness like cancer be positive you've
been cheated on and lied to so many
times that you can't trust people
anymore stop being so negative now I
don't think that there's something
inherently wrong with wishing another
person happiness and freedom of
suffering on the contrary so I suspect
that statements like these come from a
sincere place of love but also from
blissful ignorance that when we look
closer isn't so blissful as it seems the
problem however is that these phrases
contain a certain degree of denial of an
indisputable part of life suffering
[Music]
toxic positivity is the refusal to see
the negative even when it's the elephant
in a room while solely focusing on the
positive instead of facing reality as it
is it chooses rather a fake it till you
make it attitude
artificial smiles and brushing anything
undesirable under the carpet
the ancient Stoics wrote extensively
about how our thoughts about a certain
event influence our emotions and not the
event itself I quote men are disturbed
not by things but by the principles and
notions which they form concerning
things death for instance is not
terrible else it would have appeared so
to Socrates but the terror consists in
our notion of death that it is terrible
and quote from a stoic perspective
positivity is a mindset we can look at
the bright side of things in order to
feel better about them but this doesn't
happen overnight it takes a lot of
practice when you're diagnosed with
illness for example you probably won't
be able to simply shrug it off and be
happy about it even though this might be
a philosophical ideal the reality is
that the vast majority of people do not
work that way and most likely never will
in general human beings experience deep
grievances over loss and death that we
simply cannot refuse to see so is the
Nile of something that is a healthy
position to take I don't think so the
things that Epictetus speaks of can be
very well the emotions that are evoked
by unfortunate events we can position
ourselves towards these emotions saying
just be happy or stop being so negative
be positive the tricky part of such a
position is that a positive mind state
and the experience of happiness is
indeed more preferable but by rejecting
and disapproving of what is ie grief
sadness anger etc our current mind state
will only get worse mind states have to
grow naturally the only thing we can do
is creating certain conditions in which
we are more likely to become happy like
the pursuit of virtue and stoicism and
the Eightfold Path in Buddhism but we
cannot force ourselves to be happy by
saying just to think happy thoughts it
just won't work what's even worse are
the good vibes only kind of people that
have zero tolerance for anything that
they perceive as negative insisting that
they should surround themselves with
happy shiny and upbeat people well good
luck with that I'm not saying that they
should surround themselves with utterly
cynical or destructive Souls but it's
kind of naive to expect that human
beings are perpetually happy or happy on
command there might be some exceptions
but these are extremely rare cases the
world isn't good vibes only it's just
vibes good and bad rejecting either good
or bad means rejecting 50% of the
universe basically everyone even the
most positive person you'll meet as a
dark side
as Swiss psychologist Carl Jung stated
everyone has a shadow toxic positivity
is a recipe for creating a thick dense
shadow that harbors all the undesirable
traits that you're not supposed to have
because you must wear the mask of
happiness all the time all your sadness
and grief and anger and other emotions
that you can't show because you're
forced to be positive are kicked down
into the darkness of the unconscious
rotting and festering creating a monster
that will come to the surface when you
least expect it toxic positivity is an
attempt to force happiness by rejecting
any form of undesirable aspects of
certain events while true positivity is
adopting a positive attitude towards
these events while accepting the
negative aspects at the same time it's
the middle way of being positive while
leaving room for negative emotions as
well and fully accepting that we're sad
grieving and feel like crap instead of
you'll get over it we could say I
understand it's a difficult situation
but you've coped in the past you've
always coped and I'm certain that you
will cope this time if there's something
I can do for you please let me know
instead of just think happy thoughts we
could say I understand you feel like
crap right now if there's anything I can
do for you to make you feel better let
me know so by replacing toxic positivity
with true positivity we leave room for
people to feel what they feel I mean how
can we possibly help people when we deny
them at the same time people that'll
force you to be happy and positive to
simply stop grieving that only want to
associate with you when you radiate
quote-unquote good vibes aren't a
positive influence at all they project
their own unwillingness to face their
shadow upon their surroundings
forcing a mask on you that's similar to
their own by doing so they sell
themselves short on life because they
deny themselves and others the complete
spectrum of what it means to be human
thank you for watching
[Music]